## Thank you
Thank you for considering donating to Endless Sky. We appreciate the thought. The fact that anyone would like to spend money on this hobby project of ours is a compliment that we all appreciate. 

That being said, this is a volunteer open-source project, so none of us are paid to be here, and most of us incur no monetary costs in the course of doing what we do. Our motivations are many, and include the satisfaction of contributing, the fun of developing a new game, the enjoyment of keeping this genre alive and moving in a direction we like, and many others. There have even been a few that developed either parts of the game or development tools to help as part of school assignments. 

It should be noted that Endless Sky does not have any legal standing as a company, organization, or club; nor does it have any formal membership. Rather, we are an loose grouping of individuals who work together to create this game. Because of this, we do not have any means to collectively collect or handle tips or donations, or even establish a firm policy regarding them. Each contributor has their own idea as to what is or is not acceptable, and you are best served by contacting whichever contributor you wish to support to ask them. The sections below are some of the more common perspectives.

## Contributions
If you enjoyed the game and want to help the project, we highly encourage you to get involved. We can always use more story. Big stories are good, but small stories of individual people and their interactions with the player are what really make the universe come alive. There is no programming required (although if you can program, you can contribute on the engine side too), and many of are happy to help guide you through the process of making content. You can find more information on contributing to the game on the [Help Wanted](HelpWanted) page.

And if you've got an idea that maybe doesn't quite fit Endless Sky well enough to include in the game, then they are perfect for plug-ins. It was the vanilla game that made the Escape Velocity series popular, but many think it was the plug-ins that kept people interested over the years and grew the community. Technical information on how to create plug-ins can be found on the [Creating Plug-ins page](CreatingPlugins).

## Donating Money
If you really want to spend money on the Endless Sky project, many in the community would like to encourage you to donate whatever you are inclined to spend on Endless Sky to a local charity. Food banks and disaster relief organizations always need funds to help do good in the world, and it is very likely that your donation could make a huge impact to your local community. If you don't know any reputable charities in your area, you can use sites such as [Great Non Profits](https://greatnonprofits.org/near-me/)(US-only) or an equivalent in your country. Hopefully you can find local charities in your area, but if not, the [International Red Cross](https://www.icrc.org/en/donate) and [Doctors Without Borders](https://www.msf.org/donate) are two very reputable organizations, both of which are also likely to have local or national counterparts in your part of the world. 

## Donating to Individuals
If you are set on giving money to the project, the only way to do so is by donating to someone involved. You are welcome to contact whichever of the contributors you wish to support, and discuss it with them directly. Some might be willing to accept a donation, some are not interested, and some have contractual restrictions. In all cases, it is best to handle it directly with them via email or direct message. You can find information on contributors through the [Contributor List](https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky/graphs/contributors), artwork and sound in the [Credits File](https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky/blob/master/credits.txt), or by searching the [Merged Pull Request list](https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged) to find out who developed the content, mechanics, or features that you particularly appreciate.

For instance, when asked about it in the past, the founder of Endless Sky, Michael Zahniser, has commented that his regular employment pays quite well, but includes a contractual clause that prohibits him from earning money through programming outside of it. Since he would rather not put his employment at risk, he cannot accept donations.

## Thank you (conclusion)
The simple fact that you wish to spend money on this project we have invested so much of our time in is, in itself, a high compliment. Thank you. This project exists to bring light-hearted enjoyment and entertainment into the world, and to know it has succeeded is our primary reward.
