I'm hoping for Endless Sky to eventually be a collaborative collection of missions, artwork, etc. designed by many different people. This page is a basic description of what sort of "feel" I wanted the game to have.

### UI graphics

My goal for the UI was to be as minimalist and distraction-free as possible, yet at the same time to look futuristic and to hint at an underlying complexity. My chief inspiration was the heads-up-display used in the Iron Man movies.

The UI is nearly all monochrome except for certain key pieces of information. This meshes well with the human ships (which are also mostly monochrome plus colored fins for identification). But, if you look closely, there are small graphical frills in nearly all the UI panels. These include sets of parallel lines intended to look like circuit traces, tiny, faint text and numerals, and various other geometric shapes intended to be the heads-up-display equivalent of the needlessly complex gears and other mechanisms found in steampunk art.

### Space artwork

My goal here was simple: I should be able to use actual NASA images of planets and have them be indistinguishable from the "artificial" planet artwork that I create. Every planet and moon in the "Sol" system is a real image from NASA. The artificial planets need to be relatively subtle, both in their atmospheric effects and in their colors, to match the real images.

Space is very big, and very empty. Some of the most awe-inspiring images from NASA are of nebulae, but they are acquired with exposure times of hours or even days. To the human eye, the Orion nebula would be pretty much invisible even if you were inside it. So, the space background is nothing but tiny stars amid total blackness. (But, the stars have a non-uniform, clustered distribution generated by a random walk, which makes the star field look more interesting and organic.)

### Landscapes

Nearly all the landscape images were taken right here on Planet Earth. A few of them have had their colors adjusted to look more alien: blue or purple foliage, bright green skies, etc. My criteria for the landscapes are:

* Actual photo, or photorealistic image.
* Every image includes both the sky and the ground.
* No foreground objects (trees, buildings, etc.).
* People edited out (wherever possible).

### Storytelling

It's all too common in science fiction to have the central conflict defined in very black and white terms: the noble Rebel Alliance against the evil Empire. The world of Endless Sky is a bit more nuanced. Any faction you join should feel like the good guys at first: noble goals, interesting people, etc. But as you continue to play, each faction should also have clear faults. And as the war gets more and more brutal, NPCs should be ambivalent about fighting and worried about the destruction the war is causing on all sides.

My goal is that whatever faction you side with in any conflict, that faction should have a convincing narrative for why they are the "good guys" and their enemies are the "bad guys." So, the Free Worlds see the Republic as a decadent, corrupt government that only caters to the needs of the rich. The Republic sees the Free Worlds as a communist oligarchy masquerading as a democracy and feeding on poor people's anger. The Free Worlds see the Syndicate as a bunch of heartless, godless capitalists. And so on. Even when it comes to the most advanced species - the Pug, the Drak, etc. - there should be equally plausible narratives for them being benevolent, or not.

The currently playable plot line (the Free Worlds) makes a few attempts at nonlinear gameplay. In particular, there are two different endings: one where you keep working for peace and reconciliation, and one where the conflict takes a more brutal turn near the end. It's nowhere near as nonlinear as I would like, though.

### Alien speech patterns

Ideally, each species should have slightly different speech patterns to indicate that they each think differently, so their thoughts sound different when translated into human language. I've done a very bad job of being consistent with that, but my basic goals are:

* The Quarg occasionally use archaic language constructs, to hint that they're an ancient species (who presumably learned to talk to humans thousands of years ago and haven't kept their grammar books up to date since then).

* Some Hai have better command of the human language than others (particularly the Unfettered). They make occasional grammatical errors, particularly leaving out articles or inserting them where they are not needed. (This is to hint that they speak a language like Latin that does not use articles.)

* The Wanderers speak in the Hai language to the player which is being translated by a machine, so it occasionally supplies multiple translations for one word when the [meaning, intent] of the Wanderer word cannot be [precisely, completely] mapped into a single human word, or simply due to a lack of understanding of the Hai language on the part of the Wanderers.

* The Pug should sound airy, haughty, and poetic. (My inspiration was the pike in _The Once and Future King_: "Now I think it is time that you should go away, young master, for I find this conversation uninteresting and exhausting. I think you ought to go away really almost at once, in case my disillusioned mouth should suddenly determine to introduce you to my great gills, which have teeth in them also. Yes, I really think you might be wise to go away this moment. Indeed, I think you ought to put your back into it. And so, a long farewell to all my greatness...")

* The Coalition, much like the Wanderers, communicate with the player through a translation device. But while the translation device used with the Wanderers has trouble finding the exact human word while maintaining proper grammar, the Coalition translation devices produce the correct words but with improper grammar or sentence structure. Put simply, the Coalition speak like Yoda.

* The Remnant are human, but much of their communication is through sign language, and that communication which isn't sign language, i.e. speech, is heavily influenced by the fact that they normally communicate in sign. One of the ways this changes how the Remnant communicate is with their almost complete lack of contractions. It is also notable that Remnant speech is done through singing, or at least has a song-like tone to it.

### Writing style

Endless Sky's writing has a certain tone and voice. A few guidelines for writing missions include:

* Text should be concise, descriptive, and not overly flowery. It should be functional above all else. That's not to say that Endless Sky can't have interesting or lively narration, but keep in mind that this is a game, not a novel. Please avoid walls of text when writing.

* Single option choices (i.e. a `choice` in a conversation that contains only one possible response) are heavily discouraged. The point of using `choice` is to give the player the freedom to choose how they want to respond to something. Having only one option defeats this point and effectively railroads the player into 'choosing' to do or say something that they may not want to do. If the player must do something (e.g. they're being physically forced to go somewhere), then simply state that they do so in the narration - using `choice` is unnecessary.

* Generally speaking, avoid telling the player how they feel about a situation, as the player may not feel the same way. Writing such as 'You feel a warm glow when you meet this person' is not appropriate for the game. The narration's description of characters and situations should stay neutral and let the player come to their own conclusions. Similarly, please don't make major decisions for the player when writing conversations - the player should be given a choice on what to say or do in a situation.

* Don't imply that the player character is a certain gender in conversations. The player character's gender is deliberately left ambiguous and up to the player. 

* While Endless Sky does touch on heavy subject matter (slavery, war crimes, etc.) the player's direct POV should not be overly graphic, violent, or sexual. Endless Sky is not that kind of game.

* The option to reject a mission should come last in a choice, so that players do not accidentally decline plot-important missions.

### Punctuation and grammar

Not the most thrilling part of the game, but it's important to maintain consistency so that your writing is easier to review.

* Use American English for spelling and punctuation (ex. 'color' instead of 'colour'.) 
* Put periods inside of parentheses for `choice` options or other instances where the text within parentheses is its own independent sentence: (Remain silent.) instead of (Remain silent).
* Put commas inside of quotation marks: "Hello," he said instead of "Hello", he said. 
* Mentions of specific outfits or ships should be capitalized in dialog and narration. Generic terms for a category of outfits (e.g. nerve gas, laser rifles) should be uncapitalized.
* Please use the Oxford comma when writing out lists of things.
